SP-3226: Updates for DP2 release, PPDB and image services (#67)
lsst/rtn-011: alertproduction.tex

Reviewer: We met this milestone!  And can delete the sentence.

```suggestion
```

Author: Can we add a statement about the expanded area? E.g. "The template area was expanded in 2026 during early operations from DDF-only and now covers ~ X sq. degrees"   What is X, what parts of the sky?

Reviewer: I think I'd prefer to just point folks to the dashboard rather than give numbers that will become outdated

Reviewer: Since I don't think we're going to stand up a better template coverage map in the short term, you could link here to https://s3df.slac.stanford.edu/people/ebellm/template_coverage/

Reviewer: we could hide the link in the URL shortener if we wanted I guess, and redirect it later

Author: I will add these and make a short URL

Reviewer: I made ls.st/template-coverage

Author: Included link in text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prompt Data Products are generated by the Prompt Processing pipelines and released on timescales ranging from 120 seconds to 80 hours after each observation.
```

(Tweaked because the "80 hours" is artificial, not a "generation" time scale.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some new external drivers, including the upcoming six-month LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) run “IR1”, provide motivation to consider deploying DECam-based templates in Alert Production.
```

I would spell out the acronym so that non-specialists have a better chance of understanding this on first reading.

During commissioning, templates were generated incrementally based on the available observations.
Due to a slower-than-expected rate of data taking, this yielded usable templates for several Deep Drilling fields and several hundred square degrees of the wide SV survey.

\textbf{The first Rubin alerts} began \rubinfirstalerts{} and initially used templates derived solely from the DDFs, which remained observable through the end of 2025.
Rubin is scaling up alert production during 2026 over a progressively increasing fraction of the sky, as additional incremental templates become available.
The template coverage map can be found at \url{ls.st/template-coverage}.
Alerts generated during Early Operations may be produced with higher latency.

> Access to images (\S\ref{ssec:prompt-images}) and the PPDB (\S\ref{ssec:ppdb}) will not be available initially when the alert stream becomes active, but will be phased in during 2026 as discussed below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access to images (\S\ref{ssec:prompt-images}) and the PPDB (\S\ref{ssec:ppdb}) were not available initially when the alert stream became active, but will be phased in during 2026 as discussed below.
```

> During the Commissioning and Early Operations periods, alert packets for moving objects might not include the associated historical source records, and parameters such as phase curve slope (G) would be empty until sufficient detections exist to derive them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the Commissioning and Early Operations periods, alert packets for moving objects may not include the associated historical source records, and parameters such as phase curve slope (G) will be empty (null) until sufficient detections exist to derive them.
```

> Solar System discoveries will be reported to the Minor Planet Center on an ad-hoc basis during Early Operations, with a goal of increased automation as alert production becomes routine.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to say anything about how SSO analysis at this time isn't just strictly based on difference sources?  I understand they're using a wider variety of inputs for the time being.

Author: No - this does not impact the release of early data and services  -- or does it?

Reviewer 2: I think it means there will be a transition at some point during the Early Science period to an SSO data model that is more tightly bound to the Prompt Products.

Author: Can we leave that detail to a future RTN-011 iteration? (say in a few months)?

During commissioning, templates were generated incrementally based on the available observations.
Due to a slower-than-expected rate of data taking, this yielded usable templates for several Deep Drilling fields and several hundred square degrees of the wide SV survey.

The first Rubin alerts began \rubinfirstalerts{} and initially used templates derived solely from the DDFs, which remained observable through the end of 2025.
Rubin is scaling up alert production during 2026 over a progressively increasing fraction of the sky, as additional incremental templates become available.

> The template coverage map can be found at \url{ls.st/template-coverage}.

Reviewer 3: This link still points at a webpage in Eric's home directory: I think it should be straightforward top re-point ls.st/template-coverage at an observatory-hosted page when it is up. Very good use of a short link in this regard!

Author: yes, that is where it is.  The short link ensures that if/when it is move, the link remains active

\subsubsection{Using external templates}
Some new external drivers, including the upcoming six-month LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) run ``IR1,” provide motivation to consider deploying DECam-based templates in Alert Production.
These would allow the alert system to build operational history, validate performance, and demonstrate readiness ahead of full LSST alert volumes.  This approach is under investigation; deployment depends on demonstrating an acceptably low rate of false positives.

\subsection{Prompt Images}
\label{ssec:prompt-images}

Prompt images comprise raw images, Processed Visit Images (PVIs), and difference images.
Each difference image release will be accompanied by the template image used to produce it; template images are not themselves prompt products but are necessary for science with difference images.

> Starting in Early Operations, Rubin plans to release PVIs and raw images from each night's observations, with difference images following as incremental templates are built and validated.

Reviewer: Is the fall '26 delivery still "Early Operations"?

Author: As the date range  is given a few sentences later, how about just "Rubin plans to ...."

The PPDB serves as Rubin’s real-time catalog of transient, variable, and moving-object detections, storing all prompt catalog data products and observation metadata and providing efficient access for scientific analysis.
Its contents closely mirror the cumulative alert stream, with the addition of some precovery data available only in the PPDB.

The PPDB is under active development and represents a significant technical challenge.
At least initially, full query capabilities on all tables will not be available; instead, a more limited set of targeted services will be provided.
Rubin expects to support full property-based ADQL queries over the \emph{current} versions of all \texttt{DiaObject}s.
In order to support early prompt solar system and time-domain science, Rubin will additionally support dedicated query services for:
\begin{itemize}
\item Retrieval of all \texttt{DiaSource} data associated with a given \texttt{DiaObject}, i.e., the data for a light curve; and

> \item Retrieval of all \texttt{DiaForcedSource} data associated with a given \texttt{DiaObject}.

Reviewer: I think we need to specify what query patterns will be supported for the SSP tables.  Paging @gpdf

Reviewer 2: We talked about this a bit last week: I think that we can promise full-ADQL search of `mpc_orbits` and then per-object retrievals for the other data.

\end{itemize}
The PPDB will initially be configured to support these particular query patterns with efficient data clustering.
These additional query services will be linked to the results of \texttt{DiaObject} queries via the IVOA DataLink mechanism for service discovery and easy access to light curves in the RSP Portal and elsewhere.

> Resources permitting, Rubin will also endeavor to include a query service for the history of \texttt{DiaObject} record evolution for a current \texttt{DiaObject}.

Reviewer: My impression is that "history of DIAObjects" query is not planned for the PPDB initial release, again paging @gpdf

Author: This text is taken from @gpdf's PR directly

Author: Lets' wait for @gpdf to confirm

Reviewer 2: It is a (slight) stretch goal.  It's definitely in what we're asking Jeremy to work on.  I don't see a reason it wouldn't be possible.  But I did include a hedge.  If you don't like a hedged statement like this, you can take it out and we can just deliver a pleasant surprise.

Author: Early in the document I explicitly define "Stretch Goal" and use it throughout the document. I'd like to use this terminology here to be consistent and deliver a clear message: 

"A query service for the history of \texttt{DiaObject} record evolution is a stretch goal for the first release of the PPDB"

Author: Done

In summary, LSST will actively pursue incremental template generation during Year 1 and will deploy templates as soon as they meet defined quality standards. However, realistic operational constraints make widespread same-season template use unlikely. Alert production in Y1 will be limited and opportunistic, with calibration stability and survey quality remaining the overriding priorities.

\subsubsection{Using external templates}

> Some new external drivers, including the upcoming six-month LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) run “IR1”, provide motivation to consider deploying DECam-based templates in Alert Production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some new external drivers, including the upcoming six-month LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) run ``IR1,” provide motivation to consider deploying DECam-based templates in Alert Production.
```

These would allow the alert system to build operational history, validate performance, and demonstrate readiness ahead of full LSST alert volumes.  This approach is under investigation; deployment depends on demonstrating an acceptably low rate of false positives.

\subsection{Prompt Images and Direct-Image Source Catalogs}
\label{ssec:prompt-images}

> Starting in Early Operations and continuing through Data Release 1 (DR1), Rubin plans to release single-epoch Processed Visit Images (PVIs)

Reviewer 3: Can we add something about access to the template images, please? I would think we will want to make these available too, if only to avoid users reverse engineering them from the science and diff images... I assume the templates would be queryable from the same on-premises archive as the PVIs, but maybe there is room for them in the Cloud part of the US DAC. I think we don't have to specify that here.

Author: They will come with PVIs . Updated the sentence

and difference images, as well as direct-image \texttt{Source}-like catalogs for each PVI.
These direct-image ``\texttt{prompt\_direct\_source}" catalogs are based on direct detections in the PVIs themselves, similar to the \texttt{Source} catalogs that will be part of future Data Releases, and distinct from the difference-image \texttt{DiaSource} catalogs produced by Alert Production.
They are provided as an interim measure pending the availability of Data Release catalog coverage at DR1, at which point  they will be discontinued.
They will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets and will not be accessible via database queries.

> PVIs and difference images are subject to the standard 80-hour embargo period (\S~\ref{ssec:impact}); while the direct-image \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalogs are not strictly embargoed, for the sake of self-consistency they  will be released together with their corresponding PVIs after the embargo expires.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
PVIs and difference images are subject to the standard 80-hour embargo period (\S~\ref{ssec:impact}); while the direct-image \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalogs are not strictly embargoed, for the sake of self-consistency they will be released together with their corresponding PVIs after the embargo expires.
```

The exact cadence and latency of these releases are still being determined in light of operational and performance constraints; more details will be provided
closer to the start of releases.
During the first six months of LSST operations, and throughout the preceding Early Optimization Phase, all of these products may be released with somewhat
higher latency as Rubin continues to assess data quality and scale up its data  services.

The services required to deliver prompt images and \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalogs are under active development and represent a significant technical challenge.
In addition to the complexity of co-delivering these products alongside DP2 and the PPDB, serving visit-level images requires sufficient hybrid cloud bandwidth between the USDF and Google Cloud --- the same constraint driving the EDP2/DP2 split (\S~\ref{ssec:dp2}).

> As a result, prompt image and \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalog delivery have been deprioritized relative to EDP2 and the PPDB (\S~\ref{ssec:ppdb}), neither of which depends on hybrid cloud bandwidth.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a result, prompt image and \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalog delivery have been deprioritized relative to EDP2 and the PPDB (\S~\ref{ssec:ppdb}), neither of which depends on hybrid cloud readiness.
```

> Prompt images and \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalogs are expected to become publicly available in the \npcdate\ time range, following delivery of EDP2 and the PPDB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prompt images and \texttt{prompt\_direct\_source} catalogs are expected to become publicly available in the \npcdate\ time range, following delivery of EDP2 and the PPDB.

During the period before the PPDB and nightly releases of PVIs and source catalogs are made available on the RSP, the Observatory aims to enable rapid access to nightly data products in extraordinary circumstances (such as the appearance of a new interstellar object). For such rare cases the Director may allow the informal distribution of associated cutout image and catalog data products prior to their general release and on the scientifically relevant timescale. Requests for such advance access should be made by Science Collaboration Chairs through their associated DM Liaisons, and will be accommodated as observatory resources and the 80-hour embargo rules allow. 
```

Reviewer 5: Sounds good to me. Internally, we need to understand what would be "the next step" for DM Liaisons if such a request is made. I'd like me and Aaron to be aware of such requests

Author: Allowing is not the issue - it's the availability of the services to enable access. This opens us up to all sorts of potential support challenges. So until we have a plan for how to do this, I don't want to set the expectation.

Author: I do not think the SC Chairs -> DM liaisons is the appropriate channel to request exceptions to the data sharing and release policy. Many DM liaisons are early career staff whose primary function as a liaison is to support the use of DM data products and pipelines to do science. Policy is outside their remit.

Author: Let's leave this for a future issue of RTN-011 when a plan has been discussed and agreed  internally.

Reviewer 3: "Informal distribution of associated cutout image and catalog data products prior to their general release and on the scientifically relevant timescale" does not need any services to enable access, especially if we insert "small amounts of" into my sentence. It just needs permission from @rblum5  for small files to be shared. The precedent is 3I/ATLAS: if a 4I, or a galactic supernova, or similarly extraordinary event is detected by the relevant group inside Rubin (likely a mix of DM staff and in-kind contributors/SC members), I am pretty sure we would not want to prevent collaborative investigation of that event. The data policy already allows for exceptions to the rules on unreleased data such as this: they are to be ruled on by the Director with advice from the data policy committee. Having requests go directly to the Director seems the right path until a DPC is established to field them on the Director's behalf.  All this text in RTN-011 would do is point out the pathway through our data policy that already exists. And so yes: let's avoid embroiling DM liaisons in dealing with such requests, and have SC Chairs appeal directly to the Director. I can make a second attempt at the suggested text to make this clear.

Reviewer 3: @leannep Overnight I took this proposed addition to France to discuss with @rblum5 . We concluded we can wait to add this until we have the DPC stood up and able to field and evaluate such extraordinary requests. Until then the pathway provided by the data policy will still exist (SC chair can appeal to the Director to share unreleased data products, Director can say yes), but we'll hold off advertizing it, including in RTN-011, until the committee is in place to support Bob. So, OK to go ahead and merge this (once other open comments are resolved) without this addition.

\subsection{Prompt Images and Direct-Image Source Catalogs}
\label{ssec:prompt-images}

Starting in Early Operations and continuing through Data Release 1 (DR1), Rubin plans to release single-epoch Processed Visit Images (PVIs)
and difference images, as well as direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs for each PVI.

> The direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are based on direct detections in the PVIs themselves, similar to the \texttt{Source} catalogs that will be part of future Data Releases, and distinct from the difference-image \texttt{DiaSource} catalogs produced by Alert Production.

Reviewer: We settled on calling this product `prompt_source` in the butler I believe.  Not sure how you want to handle camelcasing here

```suggestion
The direct-image \texttt{PromptSource} catalogs are based on direct detections in the PVIs themselves, similar to the \texttt{Source} catalogs that will be part of future Data Releases, and distinct from the difference-image \texttt{DiaSource} catalogs produced by Alert Production.
```

Author: Ahh yes. This is a butler-only product so I should use the butler terminology

> Thy are provided as an interim measure pending the availability of Data Release catalog coverage at DR1, at which point  they will be discontinued.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are provided as an interim measure pending the availability of Data Release catalog coverage at DR1, at which point  they will be discontinued.
```

They will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets and will not be accessible via database queries.

PVIs and difference images are subject to the standard 80-hour embargo period (\S~\ref{ssec:impact}); the direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are not

> formally subject to the embargo but will be released together with their corresponding PVIs after the embargo expires, for convenience and consistency.

Reviewer: I think the prompt_source catalogs are subject to embargo as currently constructed, because we do not filter them for satellites as we do for DIASources.  

```suggestion
will be released together with their corresponding PVIs after the embargo expires.
```

The services required to deliver prompt images and direct-image \texttt{Source} Catalogs  are under active development and represent a significant technical challenge.
In addition to the complexity of co-delivering these products alongside DP2 and the PPDB, serving visit-level images requires sufficient bandwidth between the USDF and Google Cloud via the hybrid cloud architecture.
Recent scalability tests showed this bandwidth to be insufficient at LSST scale; engineering work is underway to address this, including installation of new  network switches at USDF (see \S~\ref{ssec:dp2}).
As a result, prompt image and direct-image \texttt{Source} catalog delivery is deprioritized relative to the Early DP2 coadds and catalogs and the PPDB, neither of which depends on hybrid cloud bandwidth.
Prompt images and direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are expected to become publicly available in the \npcdate time range, following delivery of Early DP2
and the PPDB.

\subsection{Prompt Products Database}
\label{ssec:ppdb}

The Prompt Products Database (PPDB) serves as Rubin’s real-time catalog of transient, variable, and moving-object detections, supporting community use of alerts.

> It stores the catalogs Prompt Data Products (\texttt{DiaSource}, \texttt{DiaObject}, \texttt{SSObject}, and \texttt{SSSource}), as well as observation metadata tables, and is designed to provide efficient access for scientific analysis and querying.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It stores the catalog Prompt Data Products (\texttt{DiaSource}, \texttt{DiaObject}, \texttt{SSObject}, and \texttt{SSSource}), as well as observation metadata tables, and is designed to provide efficient access for scientific analysis and querying.
```

As noted in \S~\ref{ssec:prompt-images}, it will not contain the \texttt{Source} catalog data for the prompt single-visit images, which will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets.

Note that the contents of the PPDB are very similar to the cumulative content of all released Alerts, with the principal exception of some precovery data that will only appear in the PPDB.
Rubin understands that several brokers are planning to aggregate the Alert stream and provide query services on the results, which we hope will cover some of the use cases of the PPDB during the period before it becomes available to users.

> The PPDB is under active development and represents a significant technical challenge.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The PPDB is under active development and represents a significant technical challenge.
At least initially the full query capability may not be available for PPDB, rather more target services will be provided.
```

> The PPDB is under active development and represents a significant technical challenge.

Reviewer: Do you want to make a comment to the effect of "Initial query capabilities for the PPDB may be constrained" or something similar

Author: yes, good idea. Could you provide some text?

Author: Added text based on our discussion yesterday

\subsection{Prompt Images and Direct-Image Source Catalogs}
\label{ssec:prompt-images}

Starting in Early Operations and continuing through Data Release 1 (DR1), Rubin plans to release single-epoch Processed Visit Images (PVIs)

> and difference images, as well as direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs for each PVI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and difference images, as well as direct-image \texttt{Source}-like catalogs for each PVI.
```

> The direct-image \texttt{PromptSource} catalogs are based on direct detections in the PVIs themselves, similar to the \texttt{Source} catalogs that will be part of future Data Releases, and distinct from the difference-image \texttt{DiaSource} catalogs produced by Alert Production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These direct-image ``\texttt{PromptSource}'' catalogs are based on direct detections in the PVIs themselves, similar to the \texttt{Source} catalogs that will be part of future Data Releases, and distinct from the difference-image \texttt{DiaSource} catalogs produced by Alert Production.
```

Author: Although I will also change to Butler "prompt_source" terminology as they are Butler catalogs

Reviewer 2: Yes, please!  I was wondering about that.

They are provided as an interim measure pending the availability of Data Release catalog coverage at DR1, at which point  they will be discontinued.
They will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets and will not be accessible via database queries.

> PVIs and difference images are subject to the standard 80-hour embargo period (\S~\ref{ssec:impact}); the direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PVIs and difference images are subject to the standard 80-hour embargo period (\S~\ref{ssec:impact}); while the direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are not strictly covered, for the sake of self-consistency they
```

will be released together with their corresponding PVIs after the embargo expires.
The exact cadence and latency of these releases are still being determined in light of operational and performance constraints; more details will be provided
closer to the start of releases.
During the first six months of LSST operations, and throughout the preceding Early Optimization Phase, all of these products may be released with somewhat
higher latency as Rubin continues to assess data quality and scale up its data  services.

The services required to deliver prompt images and direct-image \texttt{Source} Catalogs  are under active development and represent a significant technical challenge.
In addition to the complexity of co-delivering these products alongside DP2 and the PPDB, serving visit-level images requires sufficient bandwidth between the USDF and Google Cloud via the hybrid cloud architecture.
Recent scalability tests showed this bandwidth to be insufficient at LSST scale; engineering work is underway to address this, including installation of new  network switches at USDF (see \S~\ref{ssec:dp2}).

> As a result, prompt image and direct-image \texttt{Source} catalog delivery is deprioritized relative to the Early DP2 coadds and catalogs and the PPDB, neither of which depends on hybrid cloud bandwidth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, prompt image and direct-image \texttt{PromptSource} catalog delivery have now been deprioritized relative to the Early DP2 coadds and catalogs and the PPDB, neither of which depends on hybrid cloud bandwidth.
```

Author: Same as above re butler terminology

> Prompt images and direct-image \texttt{Source} catalogs are expected to become publicly available in the \npcdate time range, following delivery of Early DP2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prompt images and direct-image \texttt{PromptSource} catalogs are expected to become publicly available in the \npcdate time range, following delivery of Early DP2
```

and the PPDB.

\subsection{Prompt Products Database}
\label{ssec:ppdb}

The Prompt Products Database (PPDB) serves as Rubin’s real-time catalog of transient, variable, and moving-object detections, supporting community use of alerts.

> It stores the catalog Prompt Data Products (\texttt{DiaSource}, \texttt{DiaObject}, \texttt{SSObject}, and \texttt{SSSource}), as well as observation metadata tables, and is designed to provide efficient access for scientific analysis and querying.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It stores the catalog Prompt Data Products (\texttt{DiaObject}, \texttt{DiaSource}, \texttt{DiaForcedSource}, \texttt{SSObject}, and \texttt{SSSource}), as well as observation metadata tables, and is designed to provide efficient access for scientific analysis and querying.
```

> As noted in \S~\ref{ssec:prompt-images}, it will not contain the \texttt{Source} catalog data for the prompt single-visit images, which will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As noted in \S~\ref{ssec:prompt-images}, it will not contain the \texttt{PromptSource} catalog data for the prompt single-visit images, which will be distributed only as per-image Butler datasets (and only up through DR1).
```

Author: RFC 1134 calls these prompt\_direct\_source

Note that the contents of the PPDB are very similar to the cumulative content of all released Alerts, with the principal exception of some precovery data that will only appear in the PPDB.
Rubin understands that several brokers are planning to aggregate the Alert stream and provide query services on the results, which we hope will cover some of the use cases of the PPDB during the period before it becomes available to users.

The PPDB is under active development and represents a significant technical challenge.

> At least initially, full query capabilities will not be available; instead, a more limited set of targeted services will be provided.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At least initially, full query capabilities on all tables will not be available; instead, a more limited set of targeted services will be provided.
```

> Full property-based queries over the current DIAObject version, as well as retrieval of DIASource data associated with a given DIAObject, are both planned to support early prompt solar system and time-domain science.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We expect to support full property-based ADQL queries over the \emph{current} versions of all \texttt{DiaObject}s.
In order to support early prompt solar system and time-domain science, we will additionally support dedicated query services for:
\begin{itemize}
\item{Retrieval of all \texttt{DiaSource} data associated with a given \texttt{DiaObject}, i.e., the data for a light curve; and
\item{Retrieval of all \texttt{DiaForcedSource} data associated with a given \texttt{DiaObject}.
\end{itemize}
The PPDB will initially be configured to support these particular query patterns with efficient data clustering.
These additional query services will be linked to the results of \texttt{DiaObject} queries via the IVOA DataLink mechanism for service discovery and easy access to light curves in the RSP Portal and elsewhere.

Resources permitting we will also endeavor to include a query service for the history of \texttt{DiaObject} record evolution for a current \texttt{DiaObject}.
Experience with these query services will then inform further engineering effort on the PPDB and the future expansion to more general query capabilities.
```
